(Bell)
Hello and welcome to another episode of no such thing as a fish, a weekly podcast.
This week coming to you live from Morish!
(Cheering and applause)
My name is Dan Schreiber. I am sitting here with Aniches Zinski, Andrew Huntsomari, and James Harkin. And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite facts from the last seven days. And in no particular order, here we go.
Starting this week with my fact, fact number one, and that is, for the last four years, there has been an annual academic conference dedicated to the archers.
(Laughter)
Yep, where speakers present lectures on big unanswered questions such as, "How is it possible the characters can eat so many cakes and pies but never suffer from diabetes?"
Do we know the answer to that?
Well, the lecture I haven't actually heard the lecture.
I know the answer to that, so I looked into, this is called the Ambridge Paradox. And the scientists who presented the paper made some guesses as to why this might be.
So firstly, fitness levels are very high because, as she says, birthday cards are always delivered by hand.
(Laughter)
Messages that could be texted or emails are always relayed face to face. And residents quite often walk long distances just to ask when a relative will be home for tea, or if they would like a coffee.
Did they not also say, "It's all made up?"
That was a feature of this lecture.
I think they said as well, lemon drizzle is a cake that they eat a lot. And there's something about what's in lemon drizzle that means that it knocks out.
I know, I know. (Laughter)
But it's worth saying that these are not just fans who were comedians or whatever are trying to make a point about a comedic lecture.
These are real lecturers. This is a genuine thing. This was set up by three people who love the archers.
One is from a date modern called Kara Courage. And then there's an Oxford University person. There's a sterling university person.
There's an Oxford University person.
Yeah, Nicola Hadlam.
Talking about the archers.
(Laughter)
Wow.
This university education gone downhill.
It's just, it's brainy people who happen to listen to the archers and be academics.
But they have genuine academics who will present an idea or a lecture.
This is the fourth year that's going to happen. Happening April 5th. So this podcast will have gone out by then most likely.
So I saw some other of the lectures that they had there.
Big telephoto lens, small tick list, bird watching, class, and masculinity in Ambridge. I was one of them. And my past nips are bigger than your past nips.
(Laughter)
The negative aspects of competing at Flower and Produce shows.
That's really good.
And make it through because it's obviously such a, you know, it's been going 60 plus years the archers.
And so there's so much to pick on.
Should you say what the archers is for Americans who are listening?
Absolutely. We just plow on and don't explain it.
(Laughter)
See if you can possibly piece it together by the end.
So yeah, it's an extremely long running series on Radio 4. It goes out twice a day.
Should we say what Radio 4 is for America?
Oh my goodness.
Which is a great radio station, which does radio. I don't know how to make it.
It's a long running drama. And it's been going for 60 plus years.
And yeah, so they do pick up on, so the talks do also include the absence of primary education in the archers.
Why is there no primary? There's stuff about the flower rotor at the local church who is doing all the flowers.
Who could possibly do this? Why do so many of them not die is another one.
Oh yeah.
Well, it's like the antidote to all other soap. So yeah, it was started in 1951, so that's so long ago.
No one has ever been murdered. Now, as someone who watched EastEnders as a kid, I find this extraordinary.
Yeah, because it's based on a village, isn't it, in Worcestershire called Inc. Barrow?
Yeah.
Okay, which is a tiny little village where nothing ever happens.
But actually the crime rate in this village is much, much lower than in the archers.
So for every hundred people, the amount of crime in the village of Inc. Barrow, which is real, is 1.8 crimes.
Right.
And in Ambridge, it's 0.9 crimes. So it's your half as likely to have crime against you in Ambridge, as you are.
No way.
The fictional place.
Yeah. That's great.
Whereas EastEnders, if you live in Wolford, your three times more likely to be murdered.
There have been sort of killing off, so there was a big controversy.
This is way back when, on the very night that ITV launched, which was the 50s, I think.
Yeah, 55.
Grace Archer, one of the main characters, one of the members of the Archer family,
her character was bumped off, and it was to draw attention away from ITV so that people wouldn't watch it.
Well, obviously that worked really well.
You know it actually wasn't because of that.
Because, well, they always denied it, and this thing came out recently.
So the woman who played Grace Archer is a woman called Esan Churchman.
She kept on being asked, after 1955, why is your character been killed off?
And she always said dead girls tell no tales.
And then, aged 90, in 2015, she spilled the beans.
And first of all, she said, ready if I had no idea it was going to be such a big thing.
So everyone thought it was to overshadow ITV, and maybe it was, maybe they're still lying.
But they said they had no idea it was going to be such a big deal.
The reason they killed her was because she'd been asking for equal pay.
And they tried to exile her already. She'd been exiled to Ireland the year before.
Within the show.
Within the show, sorry.
I don't think Rainier Four has the power to exile people.
Yes, for the Americans, the producers of the Archers also make the laws of England.
Well, so what do you mean they tried to exile her?
Was she just the actor walking back into the studio?
No.
I'm back.
They sent her to Ireland in the show.
And the public outcry was so much because she was such a popular character
that they were like, we'd better write her back in, but we've got to off this one.
So this used to happen quite a bit.
So there's a guy who plays a doctor, or until recently, I think he played a doctor on the Archers.
And he was originally rejected.
He auditioned for the role of a doctor.
And he was rejected because they said he didn't sound enough like a doctor to play a doctor.
I say he said, fine.
So he was given a different role on the show.
But he could only do Thursday afternoons and weekends because he worked as a doctor.
So anyway, so there were times when he needed kind of to be in a scene, but he wasn't available
because he was busy in a GP surgery.
So the way they got around it was, they just had his wife ask questions,
and he was supposedly in another room and didn't hear them and did not say.
This is about time.
Wow.
But they do have characters who never speak, don't they?
I mean, I've never listened to it.
But apparently there were more than 500 characters who are known to the audience
who have never spoken a single word in the show.
Wow.
So there's a guy called Shane, who has never said anything, but is known to the audience
is someone who did the cooking at Nelson's Wine Bar in the 80s and was famed for his legendary teach.
There was a person called Mandy Beesborough.
She had a daughter called India, whom Oliver and Caroline's foster child, Carly,
described as having an asked the size of a continent.
And she never spoke.
And there's a guy called Derek Fletcher, who's an Incomer.
So he came in from somewhere else.
And he never ever speaks, but as a joke, they always describe him as excessively talkative.
Very good.
Very fun.
There was a guy who's actually got a Guinness World Record for playing a character so long,
so consistently on the archers.
His name was Norman Painting, and he played a character called Phil Archer.
And he'd been doing it.
The Guinness Record was for doing the same role without a break for more than 50 years.
So he passed away in 2009.
But he clearly really wanted a break, because he started penning Archer's episodes himself
under a pseudonym, which was Bruno Milner.
And in them, he kept writing his own character out.
Did he keep trying to kill himself to Ireland?
Exactly.
Not kill himself.
Just like, oh, he's gone off to Ireland this week or whatever.
Just to give himself a break from the show.
Well, because it's such a stressful job.
Why, yeah, maybe just... It probably is.
We know someone in the archers.
We do.
Yes.
I contacted him today.
So one of the QILs, her husband, played a character in the archers.
I think he's called Paul.
And so I answered...
So the character's called Paul.
He's called Paul.
Yes.
Who got, was getting off with Lillian?
Again, the character is getting off with Lillian.
The character Lillian.
Yes.
And Lillian.
And what he said about this was, when we had to do sex scenes,
it was Lillian's this perennial sex bomb, he says,
in the archers.
Didn't realise they had those.
Whereas the actress is, in fact, gay and happily married,
whereas she plays this heterosexual sex bomb.
So Mike, our friend, said, when we had to do sex scenes,
we both preferred to actually kiss rather than kiss with our hands
and try to come off and make kissing sounds at the same time.
It's much easier if you just kiss.
So...
Oh, so they did the actual...
Instead of sound effects, they did the actual snogging.
Did they actually have sex?
No, they didn't do that.
The actual sex, penetrative sex.
They're in the studio.
Okay, it is time for fact number two.
And that is James.
Okay, my fact this week is that a company in New York
has invented coffee cups that grow on trees.
So, yes, this is amazing.
So, these are reusable cups that are made from goods,
which are a plant, which is like pumpkins or marrows
or something like that.
And they're grown inside 3D printed molds.
And so, they grow on a tree and you can literally pluck the cup off the tree
and use it as a coffee cup immediately.
Wow.
It's absolutely amazing.
And of course, the problem is that coffee cups are really bad to recycle,
hardly anyone recycles them.
So, this could be the future of recyclable coffee cups.
I read that they got the idea from this
from how the Japanese have been breeding watermelons
because it's very hard to pack a watermelon in the shape that they are.
So, they've been breeding them to be rectangular shaped or box shaped.
So, you can actually stack them now inside cargo ships
and so on to get them out there.
So, they've managed to do it on actual trees outside,
but the problem is obviously you're going to have pests
and the weather you never know what's going to happen.
So, they've done it in a laboratory now.
But they think that this genuinely could be a future thing.
And obviously, they are 100% biodegradable.
Oh, great.
So, that's the main thing about them.
Because the coffee cups that we get, they're made of paper,
but they have polyethylene, I think, on the inside,
which means that basically you can't recycle them at all.
Yeah.
Well, you can, but it's almost impossible.
It's crazy. Here's a bit of a bummer of a fact.
Two point five billion coffee cups are thrown away each year.
And 99.75% of those are not recycled.
So, that's just in the UK.
Fuck!
And actually, those are 2011 figures,
and it may be more like five billion a year by now.
And also, most of these cups are made from virgin paper pulp,
which means they've never been used for anything else.
They haven't been recycled from something else.
So, a tree gets cut down, you turn it into a cup,
you drink half the coffee and throw the rest away,
because it's cold, and that's the last time it ever gets used.
They last for 30 years.
I mean, time was already bummed out by this fact.
You've now been at 70 times worse.
Poor guy.
But the future is, maybe, by the great of course.
And trees.
Another thing that's obviously quite bad for the environment
is bottles, and we chuck a lot of bottles away as well.
And other countries have this great system of bottle recycling,
where you get kind of bottle anti-vending machines,
where you put your plastic bottles in,
and you get money out.
And so, Germany has this, for instance,
and it's very clever, so you take an empty bottle
to one of these machines, put it in, you get 25 cents.
And so, people have started gaming their system, as you would.
And a man in Germany, last year, was sentenced to 10 months in prison
after he installed a magnetic sensor within one of these machines,
and then there's kind of wooden tunnel that redirected the bottle.
So, usually the bottles are shredded when they go in,
so that you can't get hold of them again.
He created a little wooden tunnel that redirected the bottle,
so it came straight back out again, and he got 44,362 euros
by inserting one bottle, 177,451 times.
I'm imagine being right behind him in the queue.
[laughter]
He did say, "The judge actually said this was a logistical masterstroke,"
and said, "You must have done nothing else every day
other than attending the machine, and he did reply.
I had a radio next to it because otherwise it was really boring."
[laughter]
I've been looking into coffee cups.
So, there's one, there has been invented, a self-stirring mug.
That's cool.
So, it's got a propeller on the bottom that goes at 3,000 revolutions per minute.
[laughter]
No, no, no, no.
That's what it says. It's a small propeller, but nevertheless, it just stirs it.
So, you know, say goodbye to that sludgey hot chocolate misery.
Like 50 a second or something.
Yeah, it's fast, it's fast. I'm not saying it's fast.
Say hello shortly to coffee spilled everywhere.
Yeah, how can you?
I don't know, I don't know how it stays in.
And there's another one which sort of heats up, and it's connected to an app.
So, it keeps your coffee at the same temperature all the time.
But it's quite expensive, and it only lasts for it.
You have to reach out to the battery every hour.
Right.
And you need to use an app on your phone to set the temperature you want your drink to be at.
So, there are some cheating problems.
Yeah, you could just use a microwave, couldn't you?
I agree.
[laughter]
Can we talk about gourds?
Yes, please.
Gordds, I've not heard of, really.
I've seen, I know that there's...
You know what a pumpkin is.
I know what a pumpkin is.
Never heard of the word "gourd" up until researching this.
And it's one of the most fascinating things I've ever read about.
I have to say.
Did you want to say anything specific or just...
No, I just want to marvel in the beauty of it.
No, they're incredible.
Gordds have been used for virtually everything throughout history.
They're one of the first domesticated things that we've...
Before we domesticated.
It's true.
We had pet pumpkins before we had pet dogs.
Yeah.
You don't want to come up against a wild gourd, though.
Very dangerous.
You might get God.
[cheers and applause]
Very forgiving, Gordds.
That's how old they are.
That's the very first pun ever made.
Was your favourite use?
I really like when you see old Victorian people smoking pipes.
That's a gourd.
That's the top of a gourd that's been attached to the rest of a bit that sucks in.
But the bit that big Sherlock Holmes looking bit, that is a gourd.
Big Sherlock Holmes.
This is a sequel, wasn't it, too.
Sherlock Holmes.
A young Sherlock Holmes.
[laughter]
I love mentioning my dear Watson.
Holmes smash.
[laughter]
He's not clever, but he is strong.
You don't want to make him deduce.
[laughter]
Yeah, so Gordds are...
They have uses.
Yeah, they've got great uses.
Oh, that's my darling.
In China, they use them as cricket boxes.
Sorry, do you mean boxes to keep insects?
I do.
You don't mean cricket boxes that you would put over you.
No.
They use them to keep crickets.
It's quite a statement if you turn up with a massive gourd over your box
when you're playing cricket, isn't it?
It implies a certain spot.
That is a thing, isn't it penis gods?
Yeah.
In different places around the world.
I love the world.
They use it for a lot of like hunter-gatherers who don't wear clothes.
They would always cover their genitals with a god.
Yeah.
I think somewhere where they were...
Oh, still one, actually.
It's in Papua New Guinea, New Guinea, and they're called Cotaker.
And they're made of the Calabash, which is a type of gourd.
And you can identify different tribes by the way they wear their gourd.
So sometimes they'll be pointed straight outwards.
Sometimes they'll be straight up.
Sometimes they'll be at a specific angle and the direction of the penis.
Like a sundial.
It's like a sundial.
Yeah.
What do I...
Tell...
What time is it?
Let's just see Barry's penis course.
Oh, yeah.
It's not like the hand of a clock.
It just stays in the one place.
So is it...
But can you deduce things about the wearer from the way they're wearing it?
Yes.
I'd show our coms.
You can deduce whether they're working or playing.
If they're working, they'll wear smaller ones.
And then...
Really?
Oh, come on.
I mean, going to a party or a ceremony or something.
But what they do not use is bigger ones to show status or anything like that.
You'll wear one similar to your friends.
So if you're a part of a group, you'll all wear a certain type.
So we would all have the same type.
Oh, no.
Yeah.
Well, we're like, I'm from the north.
So I would have a slightly different penis gourd to you guys from the south.
Yours would have a whip it attached.
And apparently some of the gods are so capacious that travelers on long journeys
would keep cigarettes or money in them.
In their penis gourd?
Well, you don't have pockets to you if you're naked apart from a penis gourd.
No, it's a good place to keep it.
Which we didn't say, but they would usually be naked apart from penis gourd.
It is quite hot there. It's fine.
But this was thought to be a problematic thing in the 70s to the Indonesian government
who thought in 1971 to '72 the Indonesian government launched Operation penis gourd
which was they tried to encourage the locals in Papua New Guinea to wear shorts and shirts.
They didn't succeed because people didn't know how to wash their clothes
and they didn't really know how to wear them.
So there were people who went, missionaries who went and reported people
men wearing shorts as hats and women using the dresses as shoulder bags.
So it is bad.
And like also if you can't find a god, then you kind of improvise.
So people in the past would use coconuts or shells or leather or grass or something like that.
But in modern years they've been using toothpaste containers,
codec film cans and even sardine tins.
Wow.
Well, yeah.
It's not the only...
Everyone else was holding that laugh in them.
Those codec film tins are not very big, aren't they?
I don't know what your status is. If you turn up with one of those.
Well, let's see what develops.
In modern times, gods are used on the other head, the actual head.
That's what you call yours is the other head.
Yeah, I mean Nigeria, there was a law that was passed where all motorcyclists had to wear a helmet.
And unfortunately helmets are very expensive for a lot of people there.
So what they did was they cut a gourd out and you would wear the gourd as your helmet.
And it was not seen as a legal thing, but it was very effective.
Because they're amazingly sturdy. They're very wooden, the gourd.
You're making your own jokes now, guys.
Well, the main reason that they're so amazing is because they were used for carrying water and food and stuff like that.
And that's why we domesticated them tens of thousands of years ago.
Like that is cultivated. We didn't domesticate them.
We cultivated you domesticate crops.
They're not world animals.
In Hawaii, they had a game called Killu.
And what you did is you would cut the top off a gourd and then you would spin it and you would try and hit your opponent's killu.
A bit like Conkers, almost.
But it was taken really seriously.
If anyone disturbed the silence that was supposed to prevail during the course of a game, his clothing was set on fire.
Sorry, when you say his clothing, do you mean his single penis gourd?
That's all he's wearing.
This is in Hawaii where they were.
Oh, I'm sorry, okay.
That is harsh.
But it does apply here today, audience, so take note.
Should we move on to our next fact?
Okay, it is time for fact number three and that is Andy.
My fact is that the Mona Lisa effect is where a painting is looking directly at you.
That the Mona Lisa effect does not apply to the Mona Lisa.
She's not looking at you.
She's looking through you.
Isn't she looking just over your shoulder at someone more interested?
Yes.
And that's why she's so enigmatic and brilliant.
So this is the effect that's been known as that for years.
And then researchers at a German university, Bielefeld, they actually were studying directional gaze.
And they thought let's do an experiment on the Mona Lisa.
And they gave people images of the Mona Lisa on a screen and rulers.
And they said, can you just map where she's looking with the ruler?
And she's none of them thought that she was looking at that.
Yeah, and then if you look at it, actually, she is obviously just looking, looking a scant, isn't she?
She's giving side eye.
Yeah.
Amazing.
So the laughing cavalier is one of these things.
And actually, it's quite easy to do this kind of thing.
If you do any painting where someone's looking directly in front of them,
then that will have the effects of the eyes following you around the room.
Yeah.
It is undeniable that the Mona Lisa has a flickering enigmatic smile, though, isn't it?
Even though a lot's been made of it.
Because you look up the picture again when you're researching for this.
You're like, oh, yeah, that isn't an elusive smile.
But there has been a study done recently, which has given quite a convincing explanation
for how that enigmatic smile is achieved.
And it's really interesting.
So it's not about her eyes, it's about our eyes.
And what it is is that around her mouth, it's quite blurry.
So Da Vinci painted it quite blurry and quite shadowy.
And if you look at her eyes, then your peripheral vision is controlled by the rods
in the edge of your eyes.
So you've got rods and cones.
The rods are in the edge.
And they're much better at making out shadows and therefore night vision.
So when you're looking in the Mona Lisa's eyes, the mouth looks like it's smiling
because you see more of a blurry shadow there.
But as soon as you look down to the mouth, the smile vanishes.
And you can try it.
You look at the eyes, the smile is there, you stare at the mouth, it's gone.
It's very annoying.
You feel like she's flirting with you and then she doesn't give a shit.
But we all know that feeling.
There are so many theories about what causes the Mona Lisa's looks.
They're crazy.
And they're not very flattering to her either.
So there are all these interesting features.
So one theory is she's got slightly yellowed skin.
And rather than just that being the age of the painting, some doctors said,
"Oh, she's got a thyroid problem."
And she's got psychomotor retardation and muscle weakness,
leading to a less than fully blossom smile.
Another theory is she had a goiter in her neck, sort of swelling,
due to a lack of iodine.
She's got heart disease, said someone else.
Another person said she's smiling because she's got enormously high cholesterol.
Does that make people smile?
Not really.
So the cholesterol thing, I think she has slightly fatty eyes
and they think that maybe that's it's not for the smile of the fatty acid.
She's smiling with her eyes because of high cholesterol.
There is a theory that she's got syphilis.
So this is really interesting because we know about the woman who was in the...
who was the subject, who was the model for it.
She was called Lisa Del Jocondo.
And we know a little bit about her spending records, her the actual woman.
So for example, we know that she bought in August 15,
seven lira of medicinal snail water from the nuns at St. Osseller.
And so snail water was a treatment for sexually transmitted diseases.
However, also she did buy it 10 years after the painting was actually painted.
So we've had to be in especially...
Yeah, but we've all had the thing where we feel a bit sick,
we put off going to the doctor.
So I guess you put it off for 10, 15 years.
And she finally went on a guy with snail water.
I didn't realize that she's painted on a wooden board, not on canvas.
I had no idea.
Oh, she did not know that.
Did you know it?
Yeah, it's not a canvas.
That is a plank of wood that she was painted on.
Yeah.
Wow, cool.
I am just on the weird stuff that's attributed to her.
There was a headline in Discover Magazine, which was really the epitome of...
There's a word for headlines that ask questions and the answer is always no.
The Betteridge Law or something.
The Discover Magazine headline was "Was Mona Lisa's smile caused by Bell's pausie or a punch in the face?"
The answer is neither.
But yeah, there was a theory that it might have been Bell's pausie where the facial nerve has undergone a bit of degeneration.
So it looks a bit limp.
Or as someone thinks that this is an academic study that was done
that says that a close-up shows a scar suggesting the application of blunt force
and also there are changes in the periol area that occur when the anterior teeth are lost
and a scar on her lower lip suggests that a teeth of pierce to her face.
So what you're looking at is someone who's been in a huge fight.
Sent for big Sherlock Holmes.
I think we might have said before that Mona Lisa wasn't all that popular until it got stolen.
And then it got stolen and then it was a big cause celebra and they became really famous after that.
When it was stolen from the Louvre in 1911, the number of visitors to the gallery actually rose
and people just went to look at the blank space in the wall where it had been.
And it was the first time anyone had ever had to queue to get into the Louvre
and that year 1911 was a record year for the gallery and all because people just wanted to see where it used to be.
Wow! Isn't that amazing? They just steal it again from themselves.
Well, it kind of was stolen by themselves from themselves because it was a guy who was working for the Louvre who stole it.
So there had been a threatening letter the year before I can't do what it said.
I'm going to steal your paintings or something, but Louvre officials had then hired a glazier's firm
to put dozens of the paintings under glass and one of the people working for the glazier's firm
Vincent Vincenzo Perugia, an Italian man, he was annoyed because the French always insulted him.
They called him things like macaroni eater and I know, other slam and insults.
And he stole it. He walked out with his under his coat.
Well, he thought that the painting had been stolen from Italy, didn't he?
Yes. So that's why he thought he wanted to bring it back to his own land.
Right. And there is a theory that during the two years that he had it, he made a copy of it and then he gave back the copy to the Louvre
and then he's still got the original or someone has still had the original.
He's still aged 180.
There was another theory that, and I think this has been discounted at this point, but he was asked to steal it
by someone else who planned to make a lot of money off it and they made six copies which they shipped around the world.
So, shipped it at a time when it would not have been suspicious and he never wanted the actual Mona Lisa.
What he wanted was for it to go missing so that he could then sell to private buyers these six who would never admit to owning it.
And that's the plot of what the most highly rated Doctor Who episode of All Time, City of Death.
There you go. So that's facts there, right there.
People have been obsessed for a long time, even though it generated a lot of publicity, the 1911 thing.
Napoleon, for instance, was enough with the painting and almost when the moment it was painted, Leonardo da Vinci knew it was a big deal.
He spent something ridiculous like 15 years working on it and after his death was massively critiqued.
And then in 1800 Napoleon took it and hung it on his bedroom wall for a few years.
Which I find very weird, the idea that he was there looking at it for a few years.
I believe that he dated a woman, an Italian woman called Teresa Guadagne, who was the descendant of the real life Mona Lisa.
You know where?
Imagine someone taking you back to their place.
They take you onto their room and you're great, great, great, great, great, great grandmother's on the wall.
You have a type.
We're going to have to move on very shortly.
Just some things about other effects that paintings have on people.
Oh yeah.
The weird effects paintings have.
So in 2007, there was a 32-year-old woman called Rindy Sam who was wearing lipstick when she kissed a painting by the American artist Sy Twombley.
And she left this big red smudge.
And so he was a very famous modern artist.
She kissed this painting.
Left this red smudge and she went to court and she explained when I kissed it, I thought the artist would have understood I was overcome with passion.
And the court disagreed and she was sentenced to attend a course on good citizenship.
Oh wow.
Also in America, Martha Rothko, his paintings are said to be such a confrontation of emotion.
And this is particularly...
He's the one who does the big blocks of colour.
Yeah, the ones you can buy in IKEA.
Yeah.
I can't go in in IKEA anymore.
I get to overcome by emotion whenever I go in.
He has, in Texas, the Rothko Chapel, which has a lot of his paintings and outside of the security guards that they have there.
They also have on standby counselors who can comfort you if the emotions become way too much.
And you need to talk about it.
Wow.
That is an easy job, my bet.
So it's the guy who just paints big rectangles.
Yeah.
And Andy will be appearing on BBC 4 in his new series.
Modern art with Andrew Hunterbury.
Just a fucking block.
All right, we need to move on to our final fact of the show and that is Chuzinsky.
Yes, my fact this week is that in ancient Rome there was a job which was to deal with infected earlobes.
And this was specifically because people were really into earrings in ancient Rome.
And they had big, heavy earrings that sort of, you know, well actually any of us who had our ears pierced they get infected at some point.
And so there was a job.
It was always a woman who did it.
They were called the curricula on matrix.
And she would deal with the infected lobes.
Or she would also, so either she would work in a salon.
So there were a few sources which described them working in the hairdressers and the man would do the barbering, the manly barbering.
And the curricula on matrix would do the earlobeing.
Or they would be employed as slaves and a household where their specific and only job was to look after their mistresses ears.
And you know, take care of their earrings, put earrings into their ears when they needed to be put in.
Take them out when they need to know that.
That's an easy job, isn't it?
That's a pretty easy job.
Very much the Mark Rothko Texas Chapel psychiatrist attended of its day, yeah.
Barbers were weird as well, actually.
Barbers in ancient Rome had various other jobs.
So first of all, being a barber was quite different to today.
So treatments for hair involved applying things like decomposed leeches, not leeches, rotting leeches.
You're in and pigeon droppings to your head.
So if you went to get a haircut, that's what you got.
And they also performed teeth extraction.
Did I just know?
It's not like there's the old thing about, I don't know if this is true, but the old thing about the pole for a barber's being white and red is because they did a lot of surgery as well.
It is, they did bloodletting, but that was actually the new and improved sign for a barber's.
Because before that, the sign was a bowl of blood.
And at some point, I think authorities got involved and they said, maybe the balls of blood are going a bit off.
Could you replace the balls of blood?
And actually about the decomposed leeches, according to Pliny, the best way to get black hair coloring is to apply leeches that have been rotten in red wine for 40 days.
And with the juice of that, apply it to the hair.
So you have to put it in the red wine for 30 days, presumably drink the wine afterwards because it's waste not one block.
And then you put the little bit in your head.
Any product today, sir?
Just another quite weird job that there used to be in ancient Rome.
There was the urine tax collector.
Wow.
Collected tanks in urine or taxed you every time you eat.
Both are equally ridiculous.
Exactly. No, it was.
This was for the batting houses.
If the toilets were there, they would overflow with urine.
They would have to be taken away.
But the urine was very necessary for a lot of chemical products at the time, as you were mentioning with the leeches, might be used there.
So many things, mouthwash in ancient urine.
That was another time, ancient urine.
In ancient Rome, mouthwash was urine.
You'd go with some urine and that would theory clean your teeth.
Would you?
Well, I wouldn't, but if I was in ancient Rome, yeah.
Wait, so they collected a urine tax?
They collected from the people who were purchasing the urine that was taken from the collective pool.
For your mouthwash. I can make mouthwash.
I imagine, I have read that about mouthwash, but I reckon mostly for dying, bleaching things.
Yes.
So bleaching hair, you could bleach that with urine.
You could tan leather with urine.
Lots of things you could do with it.
You could wash clothes, maybe?
Yeah, they'd stop of being a fuller, where you had to stand in a big tub full of dirty clothes and urine and stamp and just stamp on them.
Fun. Yeah. That makes more sense, because I do think that if you are using mouthwash more than your urinating, then you've got a problem.
One end or the other, have a clue.
Okay, so my job, should we do some more jobs?
Yeah, sure, yeah.
There was a job in the ancient Rome called The Fist You Later.
What?
I can't do it now, darling. I'm sorry, but I will do it later.
It's like an I.O.U.
A Fist You Later was someone who played a flute.
And there was a very particular guy called Gaius Grakis, or Gretius, and he was an orator, but he always wanted his oration, his speeches to be at a certain pitch.
And according to Cicero, he had this guy who was a flottist, who was playing the flute, and he would play the pitch so that whenever he spoke, he was always, he was never too high and never too low.
I read that guy, specifically that guy, would blow a note if he was overexerting himself too much, or speaking with real strained efforts, who might damage his voice.
So just to kind of turn it down.
I mean, I say it's a job, Cicero said it happened to one guy.
That sounds like a flute, sounds legit. A lot of the information we have on the weird jobs in Ancient Rome seem to come from this guy called Jan Gruter, who doesn't seem to be reference at all anymore, but he was this late 16th century Flemish scholar.
He was a son of a guy called Wouter Gruter.
He published all these volumes of inscriptions, which I just think is good to note, there were guys who went around looking at all the bits of Latin.
On bits of stone, all over the empire, and piece them together and working out what jobs existed.
But for instance, I think it was him who wrote about in the columbarium of freedmen of Livia.
So this is a place where all the slaves of Livia were buried.
So Livia was the evil woman from my Claudius, if you've read that.
And there were 600 slaves that she had all buried there.
And she had slaves, for instance, that were labeled as keeper of the armchair, specifically keeper of the family portraits was one whole job.
And the Cura Catelli, which is caretaker of the lap dog.
Full job.
There was also an ombrelythera, which is mentioned in Asian text, which is literally an ombrella carrier.
I also found that amazing etymologically that could is a thing today, a word has come completely wholesale.
And also it would mean shade, ombre means shade, isn't it?
Yes.
So if you're in the sunshine, they would cover you so that you weren't being sunburnt or...
Carry the thing that will shade you.
Yeah, so it's more like a sombrera carrier, I guess.
And a flabby leffer.
A flabby liffer, sorry, a fan bearer.
A flabby... oh, a fan bearer.
No, I've confused my fan bearer and my fan bearer.
Oh, I'm too small.
Back in you in the face with a peach.
It was the orgy planner.
That's a cool job.
Yeah?
Well, yeah.
What did they do? They just got people in or...
You.
In.
Out.
Shake it all about, I guess.
Right.
It's what it says on the tin, basically.
It was organising the parties.
And it was by someone who wasn't quite fit, let's say, socially,
to be a part of the orgy.
But the rank became such an important role that you would then be invited to the orgy as well.
If you'd organised it.
Okay, all right.
And often you'd be a slave of the person who then... I guess it was like being a PA, wasn't it?
You're their slave.
And you'd do various things like book their dry cleaning and also you plan their orgy.
Probably quite a lot of dry cleaning after that.
Okay, that's it. That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you would like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast,
you can find us on our Twitter accounts.
I'm on @Sriberland.
Andy.
At Andrew Hunter M.
At James Harkin.
And Shazinski.
You can email podcast@ky.com.
Yep, or you can go to our group account.
No such thing.
Or you can go to our website.
No such thing as a fish.com.
We have links to our upcoming tour dates.
We have links to all of our previous episodes.
And if you want to buy any of the things we've released, that's on there as well.
Thank you so much, Norwich.
We'll see you again.
Goodbye!
Thank you, Norwich.
(upbeat music)